## Core

<DIAGRAM IMAGE HERE>

IBFT is not a typical state machine.

It can better be described as a series of events that occur if certain conditions are met. These events are in the form of messages being received, and the conditions are based upon the number of certain messages received, as well as the internal state of the IBFT machine.

## New Round

The start of every consensus sequence begins with a simple check for the node - “am I the proposer for this view?”.

If the node determines (with the `Backend`) that they are the proposer for the current view, they need to build and propose the block. Upon proposing (multicasting) the proposal in the form of a PREPREPARE message, the node moves to wait for PREPARE messages from other nodes.

If the node determines that it’s in fact **not** a proposer for the current view, they need to wait for the proposal to arrive from the calculated proposer.

Upon receiving the proposal, several things are checked to make sure the proposal is valid:

- The proposal view matches the current consensus view
- The proposer is the calculated proposer
- The block is valid (validated by the `Backend`)

If all of these conditions are met, then the node multicasts a PREPARE message, and moves over to the Prepare state.

If the block turns out to be **invalid** for whatever reason (header malformed, invalid transactions, block fields…), the node breaks out of the consensus loop and moves to the Round Change state, broadcasting the next round as the desired round.

## Prepare

The purpose of the prepare state, for a node, is to get some kind of feedback information from other nodes that they also think the block is valid.

Upon receiving a PREPARE message, the only kind of validation needed is to determine if the hash of the proposal contained in the message, and the local hash of the proposal (for the node) match. If they match, the message is considered valid.

In this state, the node needs to receive Quorum valid PREPARE messages in order to proceed further, to Commit state.
Before moving along to the Commit state, the node _locks_ on the proposal, and multicasts a COMMIT message.

If the node does not receive Quorum valid PREPARE messages in time (until the round timeout expires), the node breaks out of the consensus loop and moves to the Round Change state, broadcasting the next round as the desired round.

## Commit

The final state for which messages need to be received - Commit state.

In Commit state, the node waits to receive a Quorum of valid COMMIT messages from other peers.
Upon receiving the COMMIT message, several things are checked to make sure the message is valid:

- The hash of the proposal in the commit message matches the local hash of the proposal
- The committed seal is valid

If all of these conditions are met, then the node has essentially finished the phase of the consensus where communication with other nodes in required for the current view, and moves over to the Fin state.

If the node does not receive Quorum valid COMMIT messages in time (until the round timeout expires), the node breaks out of the consensus loop and moves to the Round Change state, broadcasting the next round as the desired round.

## Fin

Fin marks the end of the IBFT consensus protocol - it is the moment where the node actually inserts the proposal into the local chain.

If the node does not insert the block successfully, the node breaks out of the consensus loop and moves to the Round Change state, broadcasting the next round as the desired round.

## Round Change

The Round Change state can be thought of as a rendezvous state for all the nodes in the network.

The nodes come to this state due to some kind of error, be it a consensus error or simply a round timeout.
The goal of the Round Change state is for the nodes to agree upon what the next round number should be, before moving to the new consensus cycle.

If the node receives a Quorum of valid ROUND CHANGE messages from other peers, it starts the new round for which it received Quorum messages.

## Round Timeout

Every round in IBFT has a ticking timeout.

This means that whenever a node starts a new IBFT consensus round, a timer that runs in the background is started as well. As soon as this timer expires, the node needs to stop going through its consensus states and move to the Round Change state to rendezvous with other nodes before starting a new round.

The timeout for the timer is calculated based on the current round number, as well as the base timeout (by default `10s`):

```go
// startRoundTimer starts the exponential round timer, based on the
// passed in round number
func (i *IBFT) startRoundTimer(
	round uint64,
	baseTimeout time.Duration,
	quit <-chan struct{},
) {
	defer i.wg.Done()

	var (
		duration     = int(baseTimeout)
		roundFactor  = int(math.Pow(float64(2), float64(round)))
		roundTimeout = time.Duration(duration * roundFactor)
	)

	//	Create a new timer instance
	timer := time.NewTimer(roundTimeout)

	select {
	case <-quit:
		// Stop signal received, stop the timer
		timer.Stop()
	case <-timer.C:
		// Timer expired, alert the round change channel to move
		// to the next round
		i.signalRoundChange(round+1, quit)
	}
}
```

## Round Hops

At any point in time, a node can receive a ROUND CHANGE message from its peers.

This is an alert system that says to the node - “hey, something is not right, let’s switch rounds”.

If a node, at any point in time during consensus, receives at least `F+1` ROUND CHANGE messages for round `r`, it stops its consensus state execution and moves to the Round Change state, waiting for Quorum ROUND CHANGE messages for `r`.
